Changelog v1.11.0 (#72)
meilisearch/engine-team: meilisearch-release-changelog/v1.11.0.md

<!-- The following lines should NOT be put in the PRE-release changelogs -->
Some SDKs might not include all new features. Consult the project repository for detailed information. Is a feature you need missing from your chosen SDK? Create an issue letting us know you need it, or, for open-source karma points, open a PR implementing it (we'll love you for that ❤️).

# New features and updates 🔥

## Experimental - Hybrid search improvements

For a future stabilization, multiple changes have been applied to hybrid search features.

📖 More details about the usage in this [page](https://www.notion.so/meilisearch/v1-11-AI-search-changes-0e37727193884a70999f254fa953ce6e).

Done by @dureuill in #4906, #4920, #4892, and #4938.

### ⚠️ Breaking changes

* When using the semantic or the hybrid search, `hybrid.embedder` is now a **mandatory** parameter in `GET and POST /indexes/{:indexUid}/search`
* As a consequence, it is now **mandatory** to pass `hybrid` even for full-vector search (with only `vector` and not `q`)
* `embedder` is now a **mandatory** parameter in `GET and POST /indexes/{:indexUid}/similar`

> * Ignore non-zero `semanticRatio` when `vector` is passed but not `q`: a semantic search will be performed (unless `hybrid.semanticRatio` is null).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Ignore non-zero `semanticRatio` when `vector` is passed but not `q`: a semantic search will be performed.
```

Reading again the sentence I think we can remove the confusing parens as it repeating the `non-zero` part in a different way.

### Addition & improvements

* The default model for OpenAI is now `text-embedding-3-small` instead of `text-embedding-ada-002`.
* Limit the maximum length of a rendered document template: when the source of an embedder is set to `huggingFace`, `openAi`, `rest` or `ollama`, then `documentTemplateMaxBytes` is now available as an optional parameter. This parameter describes the number of bytes in which the rendered document template text should fit when trying to embed a document. Longer texts are truncated to fit.

> * Add the ability to query whether a field is searchable in `documentTemplate`: use `field.is_searchable: true` if the field is a searchable attribute, otherwise false.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add the ability to query whether a field is searchable in `documentTemplate`: use `field.is_searchable`:  `true` if the field is a searchable attribute, otherwise `false`.
```

* The new document template changed to
  * filter out fields that are not searchable
  * filter out fields that are nil or missing for the current document

v1.10 and before:
```
{% for field in fields %}
{{ field.name }}: {{ field.value }}\n
{% endfor %}
```

From v1.11:
```
{% for field in fields %}
{% if field.is_searchable and not field.value == nil %}
{{ field.name }}: {{ field.value }}\n
{% endif %}
{% endfor %}
```

This last change is backward compatible. Embedders that use the v1.10 document template will keep using it. The new default document template will only be applied to newly added embedders.

> ## Speed up indexing of your vector database with binary quantization
> 
> TBD

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
## Speed up indexing of your vector database with binary quantization

The binary quantization converts your embeddings of floating point numbers (using 32 bits) into embeddings of boolean values (using 1 bit).
In our benchmarks, it reduced the size of the database by a factor of 10, and divided the indexing time by a factor of 6 without much impact on the search time.

> [!WARNING]  
> Enabling this feature will update all of your vectors to contain only `1`s or `-1`s, impacting the relevancy significantly.
> Once enabled, **there is no coming back**. Before trying it out on your main index, you should try the feature on a smaller index to ensure it fits your use case.

Although this feature degrades the relevancy of the semantic searches, it showed great results on collections with many dimensions (> 1300) and many points (more than 100000).

Enable the binary quantization by updating the settings of your embedder with:

TBD

````

Author: Thank you tamo, waiting for your update before approving then 😊

Reviewer 2: I think we're good

## Federated search improvements

> ### Apply facets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Request by-index facet distribution and stats
```

> Apply facet in your federated search, by using `federation.facetsByIndex` in the POST `POST /multi-search` route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Request facet distributions and facet stats in your federated search, by using `federation.facetsByIndex` in the POST `POST /multi-search` route.

By default the distribution and stats are returned for each index that participates in the federated search.
```

```json5

> POST /multi-search
> {
>   "federation": {
>     "limit": 20,
>     "offset": 0,
> 	  "facetsByIndex": {
> 	    "movies": ["title", "id"],
> 	    "comics": ["title"],
> 	  }
>   },
>   "queries": [
>     {
>       "q": "Batman",
>       "indexUid": "movies"
>     },
>     {
>       "q": "Batman",
>       "indexUid": "comics"
>     }
>   ]
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
POST /multi-search
{
  "federation": {
    "limit": 20,
    "offset": 0,
	"facetsByIndex": {
	  "movies": ["title", "id"],
	  "comics": ["title"],
	}
  },
  "queries": [
    {
      "q": "Batman",
      "indexUid": "movies"
    },
    {
      "q": "Batman",
      "indexUid": "comics"
    }
  ]
}
```

```

> 

Reviewer: Could we add an example of response?

````suggestion
```json5
{
  "hits": [
    {
      "id": 42,
      "title": "Batman returns",
      "overview": "..", 
      "_federation": {
        "indexUid": "movies",
        "queriesPosition": 0
      }
    },
    {
      "comicsId": "batman-killing-joke",
      "description": "..",
      "title": "Batman: the killing joke",
      "_federation": {
        "indexUid": "comics",
        "queriesPosition": 1
      }
    },
    ..
  ],
  "processingTimeMs": 0,
  "limit": 20,
  "offset": 0,
  "estimatedTotalHits": 2,
  "semanticHitCount": 0,
  // ✨NEW✨
  // Object containing one key per index appearing in `facets`
  "facetsByIndex": {
    "movies": {
      // ✨NEW✨
      // The facet distribution for queries on index `movies`
      "distribution": {
        "title": {
          "Batman returns": 1
        },
        "id": {
          "42": 1
        }
      },
      // ✨NEW✨
      // The facet stats for queries on index `movies`
      "stats": {
        "id": {
          "min": 42,
          "max": 42
        }
      }
    },
    "comics": {
      "distribution": {
        "title": {
          "Batman: the killing joke": 1
        }
      },
      "stats": {}
    }
  }
}
```

````

Author: I personnaly think it makes the changelog heavier, especially because it's not really "new". But let's make @guimachiavelli decide when he will review 😊

> ### Apply facet settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Request merged facet distribution and stats
```

> Apply facet settings in your federated search, by using `federation.mergeFacets` in the POST `POST /multi-search` route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Merge the returned facets in a single facet distribution and stats that is global to the entire request, by using `federation.mergeFacets` in the POST `POST /multi-search` route.

The number of returned values can be limited for all facets with `federation.mergeFacets.maxValuesPerFacet`.
```

```json5
POST /multi-search
{

  "federation": {
    "limit": 20,
    "offset": 0,
	  "facetsByIndex": {
	    "movies": ["title", "id"],
	    "comics": ["title"],
	  },
	  "mergeFacets": {
	    "maxValuesPerFacet": 10,
	  }
  }
  "queries": [
    {
      "q": "Batman",
      "indexUid": "movies"
    },
    {
      "q": "Batman",
      "indexUid": "comics"
    }
  ]
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion

Returns:

```json5
{
  "hits": [
    {
      "id": 42,
      "title": "Batman returns",
      "overview": "..", 
      "_federation": {
        "indexUid": "movies",
        "queriesPosition": 0
      }
    },
    {
      "comicsId": "batman-killing-joke",
      "description": "..",
      "title": "Batman: the killing joke",
      "_federation": {
        "indexUid": "comics",
        "queriesPosition": 1
      }
    },
    ..
  ],
  "processingTimeMs": 0,
  "limit": 20,
  "offset": 0,
  "estimatedTotalHits": 2,
  "semanticHitCount": 0,
  // ✨NEW✨
  // Same as facetDistribution in regular search
  "facetDistribution": {
    "title": {
      "Batman returns": 1
      "Batman: the killing joke": 
    },
    "id": {
      "42": 1
    }
  },
  // ✨NEW✨
  // Same as facetStats in regular search
  "facetStats": {
    "id": {
      "min": 42,
      "max": 42
    }
  }
}
```
````

Done by @dureuill in #4929.

> ## Experimental - `START_WITH` operator during search
> 
> Enable the experimental feature to use the `START_WITH` filter operator:
> 
> ```bash
> curl \
>   -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
>   -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
>   --data-binary '{
>     "containsFilter": true
>   }'
> ```
> 
> Use the `START_WITH` operator when filtering:
> 
> ```json5
> curl \
>   -X POST http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search \
>   -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
>   --data-binary '{
>     "filter": "hero START_WITH spider"
>   }'
> ```
> 
> 🗣️ This is an experimental feature, and we need your help to improve it! Share your thoughts and feedback on this [GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/meilisearch/discussions/763).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Experimental - `STARTS_WITH` operator during search

Enable the experimental feature to use the `STARTS_WITH` filter operator:

```bash
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "containsFilter": true
  }'
```

Use the `STARTS_WITH` operator when filtering:

```json5
curl \
  -X POST http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "filter": "hero STARTS_WITH spider"
  }'
```

🗣️ This is an experimental feature, and we need your help to improve it! Share your thoughts and feedback on this [GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/meilisearch/discussions/763).
```

Done by @Kerollmops in #4939.

## Other improvements

* Language support and [localizedAttributes settings](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/reference/api/settings#localized-attributes) by @ManyTheFish in #4937
  * Add iso-639-1 variants
  * Convert iso-639-1 into iso-639-3

# Fixes 🐞

> * ⚠️ When using federated search, `query.facets` was silently ignored at the query level, but should not have been. It now returns the appropriate error. Use `federation.facetsByIndex` instead if you want facets to be applied during federated search.

Reviewer: Perfect 👌

* In prometheus metrics return the route pattern instead of the real route when returning the HTTP requests total by @irevoire in #4839

> 

Reviewer: There's a bug fix for all facet distributions (even for single search) that found its way in the federated search facet distribution PR

```suggestion
* Always truncate values at the end of the list of facet values when the number of facet values is larger than the index setting `faceting.maxValuesPerFacet`. For example, for the facet values ordered alphabetically `["blue", "red", "yellow"]`, setting `faceting.maxValuesPerFacet` sometimes resulted in `["blue", "yellow"]` instead of ["blue", "red"]`. By @dureuil in #4929

```

The number of returned values can be limited for all facets with `federation.mergeFacets.maxValuesPerFacet`.

```json5
POST /multi-search
{

  "federation": {
    "limit": 20,
    "offset": 0,
	  "facetsByIndex": {
	    "movies": ["title", "id"],
	    "comics": ["title"],
	  },
	  "mergeFacets": {
	    "maxValuesPerFacet": 10,
	  }
  }
  "queries": [
    {
      "q": "Batman",
      "indexUid": "movies"
    },
    {
      "q": "Batman",
      "indexUid": "comics"
    }
  ]
}
```

Done by @dureuill in #4929.

## Experimental - `START_WITH` operator during search

Enable the experimental feature to use the `START_WITH` filter operator:

```bash
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "containsFilter": true
  }'
```

Use the `START_WITH` operator when filtering:

```json5
curl \
  -X POST http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "filter": "hero START_WITH spider"
  }'
```

> 🗣️ This is an experimental feature, and we need your help to improve it! Share your thoughts and feedback on this [GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/meilisearch/discussions/763).

Reviewer 3: (I tried editing the text but there are too many backticks, GitHub is not happy)

Can you change all `START_WITH` to `STARTS_WITH`, please? 😃

Author: 🙈

Meilisearch v1.11 introduces several changes about hybrid search: usage improvements to prepare a future stabilization of the feature, but also a huge impact on the performance thanks to the binary quantization. Finally, according to your feedback, we improved the federated search usage.

<!-- The following lines should NOT be put in the PRE-release changelogs -->
🧰 All official Meilisearch integrations (including SDKs, clients, and other tools) are compatible with this Meilisearch release. Integration deployment happens between 4 to 48 hours after sa new version becomes available.

<!-- The following lines should NOT be put in the PRE-release changelogs -->
Some SDKs might not include all new features. Consult the project repository for detailed information. Is a feature you need missing from your chosen SDK? Create an issue letting us know you need it, or, for open-source karma points, open a PR implementing it (we'll love you for that ❤️).

# New features and updates 🔥

> ## Experimental - Hybrid search improvements

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Experimental - AI-powered search improvements
```

### Addition & improvements

* The default model for OpenAI is now `text-embedding-3-small` instead of `text-embedding-ada-002`.
* Limit the maximum length of a rendered document template: when the source of an embedder is set to `huggingFace`, `openAi`, `rest` or `ollama`, then `documentTemplateMaxBytes` is now available as an optional parameter. This parameter describes the number of bytes in which the rendered document template text should fit when trying to embed a document. Longer texts are truncated to fit.
* Add the ability to query whether a field is searchable in `documentTemplate`: use `field.is_searchable`:  `true` if the field is a searchable attribute, otherwise `false`.
* The new document template changed to
  * filter out fields that are not searchable
  * filter out fields that are nil or missing for the current document

v1.10 and before:
```
{% for field in fields %}
{{ field.name }}: {{ field.value }}\n
{% endfor %}
```

From v1.11:
```
{% for field in fields %}
{% if field.is_searchable and not field.value == nil %}
{{ field.name }}: {{ field.value }}\n
{% endif %}
{% endfor %}
```

> This last change is backward compatible. Embedders that use the v1.10 document template will keep using it. The new default document template will only be applied to newly added embedders.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Changes to document templates are backwards compatible. Embedders using the v1.10 document template will continue working as before The new default document template will only work newly created embedders.
```

> ## Speed up indexing of your vector database with binary quantization

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Vector database indexing performance improvements
```

> The binary quantization converts your embeddings of floating point numbers (using 32 bits) into embeddings of boolean values (using 1 bit).
> In our benchmarks, it reduced the size of the database by a factor of 10, and divided the indexing time by a factor of 6 without much impact on the search time.
> 
> > [!WARNING]
> > Enabling this feature will update all of your vectors to contain only `1`s or `-1`s, impacting the relevancy significantly.
> > Once enabled, **there is no coming back**. Before trying it out on your main index, you should try the feature on a smaller index to ensure it fits your use case.
> 
> Although this feature degrades the relevancy of the semantic searches, it showed great results on collections with many dimensions (> 1300) and many points (more than 100000).
> 
> Enable the binary quantization by updating the settings of your embedder with:
> ```bash
> curl \
>   -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
>   -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
>   --data-binary '{
>     "embedders": {
>       "image2text": {
>         "binaryQuantized": true
>       }
>     }
>   }'
> ```

Reviewer 4: ````suggestion
v1.11 introduces a new embedder option, `binaryQuantized`:

```bash
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "embedders": {
      "image2text": {
        "binaryQuantized": true
      }
    }
  }'
```

Enable binary quantization to convert embeddings of floating point numbers into embeddings of boolean values. This will negatively impact the relevancy of AI-powered searches, but significantly improve performance in large collections with more than 100 dimensions.

In our benchmarks, this reduced the size of the database by a factor of 10, and divided the indexing time by a factor of 6 with little impact on search times.

> [!WARNING]
> Enabling this feature will update all of your vectors to contain only `1`s or `-1`s, impacting the relevancy significantly.
> 
> **You cannot revert this option once you enable it**. Before setting `binaryQuantized` to `true`, Meilisearch recommends testing it in a smaller or duplicate index in a development environment.
````

Done by @irevoire in #4941.

## Federated search improvements

> ### Request by-index facet distribution and stats
> 
> Request facet distributions and facet stats in your federated search, by using `federation.facetsByIndex` in the POST `POST /multi-search` route.
> 
> By default the distribution and stats are returned for each index that participates in the federated search.
> 
> ```json5
> POST /multi-search
> {
>   "federation": {
>     "limit": 20,
>     "offset": 0,
> 	"facetsByIndex": {
> 	  "movies": ["title", "id"],
> 	  "comics": ["title"],
> 	}
>   },
>   "queries": [
>     {
>       "q": "Batman",
>       "indexUid": "movies"
>     },
>     {
>       "q": "Batman",
>       "indexUid": "comics"
>     }
>   ]
> }
> ```

Reviewer 4: ````suggestion
### Facet distribution and stats for federated searches

This release adds two new federated search options, `facetsByIndex` and `mergeFacets`. These allow you to request facet distributions and stats data for a federated search.

#### Facet information by index

To obtain facet distribution and stats for each separate index, use `facetsByIndex` when querying the `POST` `/multi-search` endpoint:

```json5
POST /multi-search
{
  "federation": {
    "limit": 20,
    "offset": 0,
	"facetsByIndex": {
	  "movies": ["title", "id"],
	  "comics": ["title"],
	}
  },
  "queries": [
    {
      "q": "Batman",
      "indexUid": "movies"
    },
    {
      "q": "Batman",
      "indexUid": "comics"
    }
  ]
}
```

The multi-search response will include a new field, `facetsByIndex` with facet data separated per index: 

```json5
{
  "hits": […],
  …
  "facetsByIndex": {
      "movies": {
        "distribution": {
          "title": {
            "Batman returns": 1
          },
          "id": {
            "42": 1
          }
        },
        "stats": {
          "id": {
            "min": 42,
            "max": 42
          }
        }
      },
     …
  }  
}
```
````

> ### Request merged facet distribution and stats
> 
> Merge the returned facets in a single facet distribution and stats that is global to the entire request, by using `federation.mergeFacets` in the POST `POST /multi-search` route.
> 
> The number of returned values can be limited for all facets with `federation.mergeFacets.maxValuesPerFacet`.
> 
> ```json5
> POST /multi-search
> {
> 
>   "federation": {
>     "limit": 20,
>     "offset": 0,
> 	  "facetsByIndex": {
> 	    "movies": ["title", "id"],
> 	    "comics": ["title"],
> 	  },
> 	  "mergeFacets": {
> 	    "maxValuesPerFacet": 10,
> 	  }
>   }
>   "queries": [
>     {
>       "q": "Batman",
>       "indexUid": "movies"
>     },
>     {
>       "q": "Batman",
>       "indexUid": "comics"
>     }
>   ]
> }
> ```

Reviewer 4: ````suggestion
#### Merged facet information

To obtain facet distribution and stats for all index merged into a single ,use both `facetsByIndex` and `mergeFacets` when querying the `POST` `/multi-search` endpoint:

```json5
POST /multi-search
{

  "federation": {
    "limit": 20,
    "offset": 0,
	  "facetsByIndex": {
	    "movies": ["title", "id"],
	    "comics": ["title"],
	  },
	  "mergeFacets": {
	    "maxValuesPerFacet": 10,
	  }
  }
  "queries": [
    {
      "q": "Batman",
      "indexUid": "movies"
    },
    {
      "q": "Batman",
      "indexUid": "comics"
    }
  ]
}
```

The response includes two new fields, `facetDistribution` and `facetStarts`:

```json5
{
  "hits": […],
  …
  "facetDistribution": {
    "title": {
      "Batman returns": 1
      "Batman: the killing joke": 
    },
    "id": {
      "42": 1
    }
  },
  "facetStats": {
    "id": {
      "min": 42,
      "max": 42
    }
  }
}
```
````

Done by @dureuill in #4929.

> ## Experimental - `STARTS_WITH` operator during search

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Experimental — New `STARTS_WITH` filter operator
```

Enable the experimental feature to use the `STARTS_WITH` filter operator:

```bash
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "containsFilter": true
  }'
```

Use the `STARTS_WITH` operator when filtering:

```json5
curl \
  -X POST http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "filter": "hero STARTS_WITH spider"
  }'
```

🗣️ This is an experimental feature, and we need your help to improve it! Share your thoughts and feedback on this [GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/meilisearch/discussions/763).

Done by @Kerollmops in #4939.

## Other improvements

* Language support and [localizedAttributes settings](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/reference/api/settings#localized-attributes) by @ManyTheFish in #4937
  * Add iso-639-1 variants

>   * Convert iso-639-1 into iso-639-3

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  * Convert iso-639-1 into iso-639-3
  * Add a German Language tokenizer
```

Author: @ManyTheFish which PR did bring the change into Meilisearch?

Author: And if I'm correct it's not only about German right? But about the Turkish?
https://github.com/meilisearch/charabia/releases/tag/v0.9.1

Also, we should highlight contributors at the bottom of the changelogs, right?

Author: Checked with many: it's ok

>   * Add iso-639-1 variants
>   * Convert iso-639-1 into iso-639-3

Reviewer 4: I may be wrong, but I believe ISO standards should be preferably written in all caps:

```suggestion
  * Add ISO-639-1 variants
  * Convert ISO-639-1 into ISO-639-3
```

# Fixes 🐞

* ⚠️ When using federated search, `query.facets` was silently ignored at the query level, but should not have been. It now returns the appropriate error. Use `federation.facetsByIndex` instead if you want facets to be applied during federated search.

> * In prometheus metrics return the route pattern instead of the real route when returning the HTTP requests total by @irevoire in #4839

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Prometheus `/metrics` return the route pattern instead of the real route when returning the HTTP requests total by @irevoire in #4839
```

> * Always truncate values at the end of the list of facet values when the number of facet values is larger than the index setting `faceting.maxValuesPerFacet`. For example, for the facet values ordered alphabetically `["blue", "red", "yellow"]`, setting `faceting.maxValuesPerFacet` sometimes resulted in `["blue", "yellow"]` instead of ["blue", "red"]`. By @dureuil in #4929

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Always truncate values at the end of the list of facet values when the number of facet values is larger than the index setting `faceting.maxValuesPerFacet`. For example, for the facet values ordered alphabetically `["blue", "red", "yellow"]`, setting `faceting.maxValuesPerFacet` sometimes resulted in `["blue", "yellow"]` instead of ["blue", "red"]`. By @dureuill in #4929
```

> * Always truncate values at the end of the list of facet values when the number of facet values is larger than the index setting `faceting.maxValuesPerFacet`. For example, for the facet values ordered alphabetically `["blue", "red", "yellow"]`, setting `faceting.maxValuesPerFacet` sometimes resulted in `["blue", "yellow"]` instead of ["blue", "red"]`. By @dureuill in #4929

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Truncate values at the end of a list of facet values when the number of facet values is larger than `maxValuesPerFacet`. For example, setting `maxValuesPerFacet` to `2` could result in `["blue", "red", "yellow"]`, being truncated to `["blue", "yellow"]` instead of ["blue", "red"]`. By @dureuill in #4929
```

> * Fix Swedish support: the characters `å`/`ä`/`ö` are not normalized like the `a`/`o` characters anymore. By @ManyTheFish in #4945

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Swedish support: the characters `å`, `ä`, `ö` are no longer normalized to `a` and `o`. By @ManyTheFish in #4945
```

# New features and updates 🔥

## Experimental - AI-powered search improvements

This release is Meilisearch's first step towards the stabilization of AI-powered search and introduces a few breaking changes to its API. [Consult the PRD for full usage details.](https://www.notion.so/meilisearch/v1-11-AI-search-changes-0e37727193884a70999f254fa953ce6e)

Done by @dureuill in #4906, #4920, #4892, and #4938.

### ⚠️ Breaking changes

* When performing AI-powered searches, `hybrid.embedder` is now a **mandatory** parameter in `GET` and `POST` `/indexes/{:indexUid}/search`
* As a consequence, it is now **mandatory** to pass `hybrid` even for pure semantic searches
* `embedder` is now a **mandatory** parameter in `GET` and `POST` `/indexes/{:indexUid}/similar`
* Meilisearch now ignores `semanticRatio` and performs a pure semantic search for queries that include `vector` but not `q`

### Addition & improvements

* The default model for OpenAI is now `text-embedding-3-small` instead of `text-embedding-ada-002`
* This release introduces a new embedder option: `documentTemplateMaxBytes`. Meilisearch will truncate a document's template text when it goes over the specified limit

> * Fields in `documentTemplate` include a new `field.is_searchable` property. It is also possible to filter out document fields:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Fields in `documentTemplate` include a new `field.is_searchable` property. It is also possible to filter out empty document fields:
```

v1.11:
```
{% for field in fields %}
  {% if field.is_searchable and not field.value == nil %}
    {{ field.name }}: {{ field.value }}\n
  {% endif %}
{% endfor %}
```

v1.10:
```
{% for field in fields %}
  {{ field.name }}: {{ field.value }}\n
{% endfor %}
```

> Changes to document templates are backwards compatible. Embedders using the v1.10 document template will continue working as before The new default document template will only work newly created embedders.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Embedders using the v1.10 document template will continue working as before. The new default document template will only work newly created embedders.
```

      "Batman: the killing joke":
    },
    "id": {
      "42": 1
    }
  },
  "facetStats": {
    "id": {
      "min": 42,
      "max": 42
    }
  }
}
```

Done by @dureuill in #4929.

## Experimental — New `STARTS_WITH` filter operator

Enable the experimental feature to use the `STARTS_WITH` filter operator:

```bash
curl \
  -X PATCH 'http://localhost:7700/experimental-features/' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "containsFilter": true
  }'
```

Use the `STARTS_WITH` operator when filtering:

```json5
curl \
  -X POST http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --data-binary '{
    "filter": "hero STARTS_WITH spider"
  }'
```

🗣️ This is an experimental feature, and we need your help to improve it! Share your thoughts and feedback on this [GitHub discussion](https://github.com/orgs/meilisearch/discussions/763).

Done by @Kerollmops in #4939.

## Other improvements

* Language support and [localizedAttributes settings](https://www.meilisearch.com/docs/reference/api/settings#localized-attributes) by @ManyTheFish in #4937
  * Add ISO-639-1 variants
  * Convert ISO-639-1 into ISO-639-3

> * Add a German language tokenizer by @luflow in meilisearch/charabia#303 and in #4945

Reviewer 5: Changes related to [v1.11.0-rc.1 🐿️](https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/releases/tag/untagged-3d1d8480461ba89f276c)
```suggestion
* Add a German language tokenizer by @luflow in meilisearch/charabia#303 and in #4945
* Improve Turkish language support by @tkhshtsh0917 in https://github.com/meilisearch/charabia/pull/305 and in  #4957
```

# Fixes 🐞

* ⚠️ When using federated search, `query.facets` was silently ignored at the query level, but should not have been. It now returns the appropriate error. Use `federation.facetsByIndex` instead if you want facets to be applied during federated search.
* Prometheus `/metrics` return the route pattern instead of the real route when returning the HTTP requests total by @irevoire in #4839
* Truncate values at the end of a list of facet values when the number of facet values is larger than `maxValuesPerFacet`. For example, setting `maxValuesPerFacet` to `2` could result in `["blue", "red", "yellow"]`, being truncated to `["blue", "yellow"]` instead of ["blue", "red"]`. By @dureuill in #4929

> * Swedish support: the characters `å`, `ä`, `ö` are no longer normalized to `a` and `o`. By @ManyTheFish in #4945

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Improve the task cancellation when vectors are used. By @irevoire in https://github.com/meilisearch/meilisearch/pull/4971
* Swedish support: the characters `å`, `ä`, `ö` are no longer normalized to `a` and `o`. By @ManyTheFish in #4945
```

* Improve the task cancellation when vectors are used, by @irevoire in #4971
* Swedish support: the characters `å`, `ä`, `ö` are no longer normalized to `a` and `o`. By @ManyTheFish in #4945
* Update rhai to fix an internal error when [updating documents with a function](https://github.com/orgs/meilisearch/discussions/762) (experimental) by @irevoire in #4960
* Fix the bad experimental search queue size by @irevoire in #4992
* Do not send empty edit document by function by @irevoire in #5001
* Display vectors when no custom vectors were ever provided by @dureuill in #5008

# Misc

* Dependencies updates
  * Security dependency upgrade: bump quinn-proto from 0.11.3 to 0.11.8 by @dependabot in #4911
* CIs and tests
  * Make the tests run faster by @irevoire in #4808
* Documentation
  * Fix broken links in README by @iornstein in #4943
* Misc
  * Allow Meilitool to upgrade from v1.9 to v1.10 without a dump in some conditions, by @dureuill in #4912

>   * Fix bench by adding embedder by @dureuill in #4954

Author: ```suggestion
  * Fix bench by adding embedder by @dureuill in #4954
  * Revamp analytics by @irevoire in #5011
```
